well the news conference is about to
start thank you fergus professor chris
whittie
sir patrick valance uh and the prime
minister
here good evening and thank you very
much for
joining us our extraordinary nhs has now
succeeded in vaccinating more than 17.7
million people across the uk and
nearly a year after this pandemic began
this unparalleled national effort has
decisively shifted
the odds in our favor so that we no
longer have to rely
simply on lockdowns and restricting our
behavior and putting our lives
on hold but with every day that goes by
this program of vaccination is creating
a shield
around the entire population which means
that we're now traveling
on a one-way road to freedom
and we can begin safely to restart our
lives and do it with confidence
and i want to be frank about exactly
what that means and the
trade-offs involved
the vaccines reduce the danger of covid
they save lives and they keep people
out of hospital but no vaccine against
any disease has ever been 100
effective so whenever we ease
the lockdown whether it's today or in
six or nine months
we've got to be realistic and accept
that there will be more
infections more hospitalizations and
therefore sadly
more deaths just as there are every year
with flu even if we sustain the lockdown
indefinitely which would itself cost
lives and do immeasurable harm to our
children
we would not be able to eradicate this
disease
and that's why it's right gradually to
replace the protection afforded by
the lockdown with the protection of the
vaccines
and our approach is to move with the
utmost care
and advancing in four steps each
with a minimum of five weeks apart so we
can properly judge the impact of each
relaxation before you move on and you
can see
the details of all of this on gov.uk
we will be led at every stage by data
not
dates and we will apply for tests
the pace of the vaccination program the
effectiveness of the
vaccines the pressure on the nhs and the
risks
of any new variants of covid
and therefore as we look at the data
today i can confirm that two weeks from
today
monday the 8th of march we will begin
step one and schools and colleges across
england will reopen
and teaching classrooms can start again
all the evidence shows that schools are
safe and the risk posed
to children by covid is vanishingly
small
but to offer even greater reassurance
we're introducing
twice weekly testing of secondary school
and college pupils
and asking them to wear face coverings
for the rest of this term
students on practical courses can return
to university
but all others will need to continue
learning online and will review the
situation
before the end of the easter holidays
we will allow breakfast and after school
clubs to restart
and among other changes on march the 8th
you'll be able
to have a coffee on a bench or a picnic
in a park
with one person outside your household
and because we know how stressful this
time has been
and how people yearn to see friends and
family
if only fleetingly we will now go
further and on the 29th
of march you can meet more of your
friends and family outside including in
gardens
either as two households or subject
to the rule of six and then
we'll go on to step two which is no
earlier than the 12th
of april and this is a big moment
because shops
will return and reopen hairdressers nail
salons will reopen
pubs and restaurants will all be able to
serve customers
outside precisely because we know that
outside
the risk of transmission is lower
and then five weeks after that no
earlier than may the 17th
we'll go to step three and open all
our hospitality sector to service
indoors pubs bars
restaurants along with hotels and
cinemas
and subject to capacity limits
we will also open sports stadia concert
halls
and theaters and finally
provided we continue to pass the four
tests
then from the 21st of june we will go to
step four
and say goodbye to most remaining
restrictions
resuming large-scale events like
business conferences
and football matches lifting the limits
on weddings and reopening nightclubs
all of these steps will apply in england
and the government will continue to do
whatever it takes to protect jobs
and livelihoods across our whole united
kingdom for the duration
of the pandemic and i know there are
some
who would like to accelerate the
timetable i know of course there are
others who
would like to be more cautious and stay
in the slow lane
and i understand both points of view and
i sympathize
because levels of infection are still
high
and we must strike a very careful
balance and always accept
that we've got to be humble in the face
of nature
but also we must accept that we cannot
persist
indefinitely with restrictions that have
separated families
and loved ones for too long threatened
the livelihoods
of millions kept pupils out of school
it's thanks to the roll out of these
vaccinations
many of them pioneered in this country
that the balance
of that judgment is now changing in our
favor
and thanks to the vaccinations that
there
is light ahead leading us to a spring
and a summer which i think will be
seasons of hope
looking and feeling incomparably better
for us all and from which we will not
go back thank you very much i'm going to
ask chris to do the slides
thank you prime minister uh first slide
please
um this slide uh which is familiar i
think to anyone who's
watched these uh these press conferences
shows the number of people testing
positive for covert 19 in the uk
and as you can see there are essentially
two things to take away from this
the first of which is that the number
testing positive
has fallen and is continuing to fall
but the second is that the rates are
still very high at uh over 11 000
cases on a seven day average rolling
basis
next slide please
similarly when we look at number of
people in hospital with kovid
in the uk again you can see there is a
significant fall
that is continuing but the rates are
still high and they're only slightly
below
the height of the first peak we had last
year
so definitely things are heading in the
right way but remain
at a high level next slide please
and then if we look at the number of
people who have sadly died with
following a positive test result for
covert 19
these are also falling and the most
recent 7 day average
is 480 deaths a day
so still high but falling
and falling steadily at this point in
time
next slide please now all of the things
we've seen so far
largely are done or probably almost
entirely are done
due to the activities of the general
public
in the uk and all four nations in the uk
staying at home and following the
lockdown guidelines
but we have had this really
extraordinary rollout of vaccination
across all four nations of the uk and
you can see
uh in this graph that this this line is
continuing to go up
steadily day on day next slide please
so um i just wanted to talk a little bit
about what we would expect
the impact of this to be and the prime
minister has also asked me to talk a bit
about the
results of three studies that were
released today
from england and from scotland so the
first thing in this slide
uh to say is that uh the great majority
uh well over 90 percent nearer 99
of those who sadly die of kovid
are in the groups the jcvi joint
committee on vaccination and
immunization groups
uh one to nine and they're in the dark
blue and this is a study
of people in hospitals in the uk
and the largest group of those 86
percent
are people who are in groups one to four
these are people uh who are over the age
of 70 uh and at this stage uh we have
vaccinated
the great majority of people in those
groups including in
care and nursing homes who wish to be
vaccinated a very very high proportion
so we anticipate that if the vaccines
are effective
we would anticipate the death rate will
now start to fall not just because of
people
staying home and obeying the lockdown
guidance and instructions
which people are to an extraordinary
degree
but also because of the effects of
vaccination because people have now had
these vaccines
we're now on the middle bar which is
people in groups
ages 50 to 69 already going very rapidly
through those over the age of 65
and people who have significant health
problems
who are under 65 but who we want to
accelerate
the period by which they're vaccinated
so they too are being vaccinated early
on
so this will lead to a significant
further reduction
in the risks of people dying and this
also includes
a significant number of people who are
then hospitalized
who are not in the first four groups but
there are people who get severe disease
and are hospitalized under
the age of 50 and it's important to
understand that we must not leave them
behind in vaccination
uh because that is that there are still
severe cases
in people who otherwise have no other
health problems as well as people who
got
predictable health problems in hospitals
across the uk
under the age of 50. next slide please
so my final slide is just to make that
point in a different way and these are
data
looking at the proportion of people
admitted to hospital
with kovid 19 by age here in england
and what you can see is people over the
age of 65
the great majority of whom have now been
vaccinated make up
58 percent of those people but people
under 65 make up a very substantial 42
so there's a lot of people who would if
they got
covid might go on to develop severe
disease and go into hospital
uh still unvaccinated and we have quite
a way to go in all four nations of the
uk but making very fast
progress now how effective
are these vaccines and that's a question
which we said we think they're effective
trials are very good to date what was
released today
both in england and in scotland were
three studies
which uh tried to address this problem
and this is what the prime minister
asked
me to try to lay out the first of them
is a study done it called the siren
study
that was done uh in people who are
health care workers so young
adults under the age of 65 and what that
showed
is that at 21 days there was a 72
reduction uh of the effectiveness of the
of the vaccine
but the vaccine led to a 72 reduction
uh in the number of people who developed
an infection
even a mild infection at 21 days
after just one dose of the vaccine and
this
increased further to 86 percent if they
had a
second dose so that's extremely good
protection just from mild infection now
obviously
you have to have mild infection to go on
to get severe disease and then the
second study which is an important
additional piece of information
from public health england showed that
you've got significant protection also
in older people
including people over the age of 80. so
over 55 or 55 percent
protection just from getting mild
disease
at 35 days but if people got an
infection
there was a further reduction of around
50 percent in them having severe disease
and therefore going to hospital
so if you put them together you
obviously won't get into hospital if you
don't get disease at all
and then you have a further 50 reduction
so we are confident from these data that
the
the effectiveness of this vaccine in
older people
in reducing hospitalizations is greater
than 75 the exact number
will change as the data comes in but
this we are confident that this is going
to be the case
and this is backed up by a third study
that was released from scotland
and that looked at both the pfizer
vaccine
which is the data i've shown from the uk
so far
and the oxford astrazeneca vaccine and
the headline
numbers they report and to be clear i
think these will change a bit over time
but the headlines that they report is
that the probability of
the vaccines reducing your chance of
going to hospital so that's made up of
the reducing the risk of infection and
then reducing the risk of severe disease
both of them together
was 85 percent for the pfizer vaccine
and over 90 percent for the oxford
astrazeneca vaccine
and that that was remained that that
vaccine effectiveness remained in those
who were 80 years old
so this tells us three things the first
one is
these vaccines both the vaccines being
used in the uk provide a very
substantial level of protection from the
first dose and in fact the great
majority protection is
from the first days so very important
people get their vaccination
secondly the data suggests that that
that protection is
continues over a prolonged period but
beyond 21 days
so this is i think supportive of it
doesn't prove it's exactly right to be
supportive of
are delaying the second dose but
importantly the third thing it shows
is that we must make sure that those
who've had a first vaccine
go on to get their second vaccine
final thing the prime minister asked me
to talk about was the delay of
five weeks between the different stages
of this
between the different stages as they're
rolled out the next phases
of the roadmap that the prime minister
announced to parliament today
and the reason for that is that
inevitably for each one of these steps
we are taking a risk which is an
accepted risk
there is a risk to this and everybody in
the country i'm sure
understands this and what we want to do
is after each
set of risks with a particular set of
opening up
wait until we have data that tells us
has this done what we expected it to do
have we actually ended up in a slightly
worse place than we thought we would
or have indeed we ended up in a slightly
better place but i think
the big worry is have things got
slightly worse than we were expecting
and we cannot measure that in less than
about four weeks
because it takes that long for the
effect to be seen
and the data to come through and be
analyzed so that's the reason for the
five-week gap because it allows us to
see it whether it's had an effect
and then to make a judgment as to
whether that's material
to making the next decision that's the
basis on which this
uh is done but i think i would like to
re-stress what i said at the beginning
on the first slide there are still very
significant numbers of people
with infections every day in the uk
there are still a lot of people in
hospital with this disease this is not
the end but this is the point where
we can have a steady risk-based
data-driven
opening up but everybody must stick to
the guidelines
as they go through the different stages
because if we don't do that then we will
get to a stage where the rates go up
very high
and you'll find there are people who are
not protected by the vaccination
these are not 100 effective as the prime
minister said
thank you very much thanks very much
chris patrick anything to
no i completely agree with that and and
the
caution of going every five weeks is
very important because we need to
measure
so that we're not flying blind on this
we need to know what the impact
of the opening up steps are thanks very
much let's go to
david from cardiff the vaccine rollout
is going really well
but people will soon start to require
their second dose of the vaccine
what is the government's plan for
incorporating these second doses into
the vaccine rollout
will you need to cut back on the first
doses being given or will the
vaccination program be expanded even
further
and how
david you asking a very important
question we've got to make sure that we
have
uh the supply in place for everybody to
get their their second vaccination
within 12 weeks
as well as giving every adult
as as we've said already a vaccination
by the end of
july and we do believe we have the the
the supplies in place to keep up that
rhythm and that
timetable and obviously we're looking
the whole time to
uh source uh more uh where we can from
our suppliers
uh according to the the contracts that
we've already
uh that we've already signed um but
that's the that's basically the
plan david i hope that will that will do
you let's go to
rachel from london the who
has called on countries to ensure an
equitable vaccine rollout
this is not only the fair thing to do
it's also safer so we ensure that we
give the virus less opportunities to
evolve and fewer strains develop will
the uk commit to ensuring a foreign
equitable vaccine rollout and
distribution
once for instance our top nine priority
groups have been vaccinated
yes rachel it's very important that the
uk will continue to
support vaccine rollout across the whole
world that's why we've
invested in uh the kovacs vaccination
program
forgive me one of the biggest donors in
the world to
to kovacs and as you rightly say there's
no point in having
a a vaccination program that is simply
confined to
to one country it's a it's a global
pandemic we need a global
vaccination program anything to add
chris hall
thank you very much let's go to laura
koonsburg of the bbc
uh thank you very much prime minister um
there has been
progress today but there will be some
rules in place for another
four months when do you really hope to
be able to say to the public
it's over and professor witty or sir
patrick violence
it's been acknowledged very openly today
by the government that war
deaths will come as a result of lifting
restrictions
and i know you won't want to put
specific numbers on that but
can you warn the public what kind of
numbers they should be prepared for
because even one of the optimistic
suggestions is around 30
000 more deaths as a result of lifting
the rules
and while the vaccine program has been
remarkable government documents today
suggest
66 percent of people will be covered
only about two-thirds of the population
if there's full uptake what do you
actually expect the uptake to be
laura this isn't the end today but
it's very clearly a road map that takes
us to the end and takes us
on a on a one-way journey uh we very
much hope if we can
uh stick to it if if the the data
continues to support the decisions we
uh take at the the the pace that we want
to
take them so the the you ask when will
you you've you've got the
the key dates uh april the the 12th
may the 17th then uh june the 21st
uh for for everything and uh to be to be
open again
uh and for things that you know we
couldn't do last year
uh like nightclubs and and all the rest
of it uh theaters
uh to be back up and running in but you
know we will be guided
by uh the data and by the progress that
we make and that's why
it is important also to be
to be cautious and to recognize
that uh it's by i think people would
rather see
a certainty about these dates as much
certainty as we can
give than uh than haste
and that's the that's the trade-off
obviously that we've got to make
on the numbers um the uh and i've been
very
careful never to put forward numbers
that i can possibly avoid into the
public domain because i just don't think
it's helpful or in fact meaningful
but i think just thinking about it in
relative terms
every year in the uk as in every other
country you get
substantial numbers of people dying from
respiratory infections flu is the one
everyone thinks about
an average year might be about 9 000
people a year
bad years are significantly more than
that but you also have pneumonias you
have no adenoviruses there are a lot of
other respiratory
infections and this i'm afraid for the
foreseeable future
coronavirus is going to be added to that
list of things that those who are
vulnerable
uh even despite vaccination uh can be at
risk of we vaccinate against flu we
vaccinate against
pneumococcal pneumonia and still there
are cases and there are deaths
and i think people need to see it in
that way not to see it separate from
others
but see it as this is something where
the vaccination will take the rates
right down
but they will not get rid of this and
this is something we have to see for the
long term
and in my view is likely to be a problem
in particular in the winter
for the next few winters then let's see
how we how we go
on the 66 thing and this is made up in
part
because children are currently not being
vaccinated there's a live question about
whether in the long run
vaccination of children uh would be
something to offer but there's a long
way to go before that we haven't got
trials in
children we haven't got licensed in
children we haven't got the modeling to
suggest that's the right thing to do in
children at this point
i think this is probably several steps
away at this point the real priority
is uh getting through all the adult
groups
and i think what's been really cheering
is we thought we were being quite
ambitious
in the uptake we would get on the
vaccines actually the uptake from almost
every part of society
so far has been incredibly high and this
is very good because it protects them
it protects the people immediately
around them and in the long run this
will help protect society
so the extraordinary levels of uptake
we're seeing over 90 percent
uh in some cases well over 90 percent uh
i hope that is replicated
as people are invited for vaccination
please do go it protects you and it
protects everyone around you
and then in terms of you know minimizing
the number of deaths it's about
going slowly and it's about us all
sticking with the rules so when
there's a chance to sort of do a bit
more that isn't an invitation to do a
lot more
it's an invitation to do a bit more and
that's really how we've got to behave as
we go through this roll out to make sure
that we do it at the right stages
measure as we go along
and make sure that we pick up if there
is an increase we pick it up early
enough to be able to do something about
it
thanks laura robert person itv
good afternoon good evening uh gentlemen
um professor witte
we've heard from you so often that the
rate of infection
can't get above one the famous ah but
there's no reference
to our in the four tests that you've set
for opening up society and the economy
so what
rate of infection in the coming weeks
and months is one that should cause us
concern and for the prime minister you
seem to have had a damascene conversion
to the idea
that vaccine and testing certificates or
passports
are maybe the way to let us go safely
back to
big live events and big concerts and are
you now persuaded that's the way to
reopen
the economy safely and i actually didn't
know whether professor whittie and uh
surpassing balance think that those
sorts of certificates would be a good
idea
uh on the hour above one i mean i think
that
until this point in time until we had
vaccination the inevitable result of
cases rising was elderly people's cases
rising hospitalizations rising and
deaths rising
the advantage of a vaccination is it
allows us to break that
an absolute inexorability that there was
up to this point in time and above all
to protect those who are most vulnerable
from hospitalization and death so that
is absolutely critical
now we all know and the modeling
demonstrates this that was released in
the same time that there will be
subsequent to even with these quite
careful one-at-a-time
measures that will at some point be a
surge of
uh cases and r is going to creep closer
to one at every stage
r is going to keep close to one it might
at some point uh exceed one
and at that point we will expect to
start to see some cases rising
but firstly the vaccination takes a lot
of the heavy lifting on this
and once you've got a large proportion
of the population uh uh
vaccinated that we our expectation is
that will pull the natural r
that it can get to well down so that
will take a lot of the heavy load
and secondly we're expecting that even
from this stage a very high proportion
but not all
of elderly people and vulnerable people
are protected by the vaccination
so the tight linkage between our and
deaths
is less tight than it was but the point
of these stages the prime minister has
laid out
are to keep that surge to a low level at
the same time as protecting the most
vulnerable that essentially
is the twin track approach to this and
if we let things go very fast now
the result would be a very significant
rapid increase in our
a rapid surge of the virus and then
people we have an incomplete protection
from the
vaccine at the moment and that would
lead inevitably to death so that's the
reason for taking it very steadily
as the prime minister has laid out rob
on
vaccine passports i think for things
like international travel
uh other countries will unquestionably
uh think of
uh insisting upon uh them just like you
know you might insist on a certificate
that you've
had a yellow fever jab or or whatever so
i think that
there's something that's likely to be
important on the in in the conversation
about
international travel on the question of
what is the role of something like
a certificate of vaccination within the
domestic
uk economy there are clearly some
quite complex issues some issues some
ethical issues issues about
discrimination and so on to what extent
can government
either compel or indeed
forbid such uh use of such
uh certification um i think all that
needs to be gone into and so we're gonna
have a review
of the whole issue uh
before we come to it as it were because
at the moment the emphasis
is on vaccinating uh everybody or all
adults and that's the
that's got to be right because that's
the the non-discriminatory
way to to go but also uh and
so there may be there may well be a role
for certification but we just need to
uh to get it right um and always
remember
that the uh the advantages of testing
lateral flow testing
so both things uh together as i think i
said uh
a few a few days ago i think will uh
play an important part
uh but we'll be we'll be in the course
of the of the
coming steps we'll be setting out more
as i told the house earlier on
on issues like uh like air travel on uh
on mass events on big events on uh
social distancing
and on uh on certification for full
reviews that we'll be uh we'll be doing
thanks a lot let's go to sam coat sky
news thank you prime minister
you've said over and over that today's
plan will be
irreversible how can we know that this
isn't an empty promise
if you have to lock down the nation
again for a fourth time
would it be a resignation worthy matter
and to both scientists
is it possible in the opinion of both of
you to have an irreversible
unlocking sam
i can't guarantee that it's going to be
uh irreversible but the intention
is that it should be irreversible and
that's why we're going uh in the way
that we are that's why we're taking the
the steps that we are and uh people a
lot of people
will say um you know
why don't you uh go faster or why don't
you see if you could
uh bring things uh bring some of this
unlocking
uh earlier if things are going well and
the uh
the there are signs that the disease is
is continuing to
retreat and for the answer to that
you you've just got to listen i think to
what uh chris was
when patrick was saying earlier on about
the need for an
interval uh between the the relaxations
the
the unlocking uh stages and the the need
to look at the data
see what's happened you know this
disease is capable
as we have seen this variant is capable
of spreading
really very fast uh when you unlock we
saw that
uh in uh the end of last year in in
january
uh we've seen how fast it can take off
uh when it get
when it gets going that's why we've got
to look at the
way the vaccinations are working we've
got to look at the data and proceed
cautiously but as i say i certainly hope
irreversibly that's what we that's what
we want to do and we don't want to go
back into
another lockdown we want
uh security to deliver as much security
and certainty as we can to the public
and
to to business and to everybody that's
why we think it's a
a reasonable uh timetable and then the
the the miracle of the vaccines is
extraordinary if you think about it we
went from having no vaccine for human
coronavirus disease at
all ever to having very effective
vaccines
in a period of a year that has never
been done before for any other disease
those vaccines as we now know from the
real world data coming out in the uk
and also from israel are very effective
in practice
that provides an extraordinary bedrock
of success
from which to think about moving to a
normality
as a result of that and the way to do
that is to go cautiously as you release
have enough time between measures so you
can assess what's going on
and take new measures to release when
you're safe to do so
not beforehand that's the path to try
and get a
gradual approach back towards normality
based on that bedrock of vaccine
effectiveness thanks
very much uh sam jason groves daily mail
thanks um professor witte it was
reported at the weekend that you were
unhappy about the big bang approach to
reopening schools can you reassure
parents and the wider community that it
is safe
and prime minister we've got cases down
by 80 we've got the cavalry
here in your words but you're still very
cautious um
that sort of buccaneering boris who won
the election he wouldn't be waiting
four months to let people hug their
grandchildren again
what's happened to you are you have you
become a gloomster
why don't you go first chris on that one
uh
so i'd like to be reasonably unambiguous
on the school's point i was rather
surprised to read
what i read in one newspaper and then
reported in others
since i categorically denied it to the
journalists involved but
that they still printed it so fine so
now let me now say
very clearly why that is the case
first thing is ever it is absolutely
universally accepted
that there are huge advantages for
children to be at school from a health
point of view
mental and physical as well as from
educational and from a life course
point of view those are overwhelming and
they are not in any dispute everyone
accepts that
and if you keep children out of school
every single one of the children you
keep out of school
is disadvantaged it was this was a point
that was made by all
the chief medical officers and deputy
chief medical officers together as a
single document
because we wanted all to say how
strongly we felt this is the case and
i'm sure
all educational professionals would
agree the second point we made
at that time which is still the case is
the risk to children is incredibly low
uh from going to school uh and indeed
from catching covert covid
one of the few good things about kovid
is the risk to children whilst not zero
nothing in
covid the risks are zero the risks are
so much smaller
than they are for adults and others and
therefore we are confident
that school you know given the huge
benefits of school
the very small residual risk is strongly
in favor from the child's point of view
everything is strongly in favor of
children where they primary or secondary
of going to school and the data on that
i think are unambiguous
the third question is and this is the
one which led to having to
uh close schools uh this time round
as it did indeed on the first wave is
the impact this can have on our
uh and the view is as things are falling
down much falling down rapidly at the
moment
there is some headroom to go ahead and
the first priority as the prime minister
has repeatedly said is for schooling and
i think everyone would
agree with that we have a natural fire
break
at the easter holidays and we've got
these five weeks to work out how things
are going so there's a large number of
insurances built in and there's several
things we're going to be doing this time
around on schools
which will take the risk even further
down than it has been
before including greater use of testing
in wider use of masks and a whole
variety of other things
as you know which have been incredibly
supported by
many in the teaching uh professions and
i really would like to
pay a huge tribute to what teachers have
done over the whole period because
they've kept schools going for
children of key workers all the way
through including the absolutely worst
times and they've done that because they
believe so strongly in education as all
of us do
and the final thing that is needed is
obviously to make sure that as
far as possible schools are a safe uh
working environment
relative to all other working
environments and many of the things
we're talking about
will help that as well because teachers
and other health and other uh teaching
professionals
obviously want to consider that but um
what you look at when you look at the
data
are the relative to many of the
professions that continue to work
through this to nurses care home workers
many other professions teaching there's
not zero risk to teaching in any
profession but teachers and not a
high-risk profession in the way that
those kinds of
professions are high-risk professions
but i don't want to diminish that i'm
just saying they should be made as
as safe as possible including in
environments where people aren't doing
uh face-to-face uh classroom teaching
but you know to go back to the beginning
i think there is a really clear reason
why everybody wants children to be in
school
and what we therefore have to do is try
and make that as ris reduce the risk as
far as we can
for two for students for parents for
teachers
and the final thing is uh the
vaccination that's going on at the
moment
what's called the the uh tier vi
vaccination
for jcvi includes people under the age
of 65 if you've got pre-existing health
conditions
and for teachers and parents who are in
those groups
the vaccination is accelerated because
they're part of
the early wave of vaccinations so i just
want to put it's a long answer
but that's because i think a lot of uh
parents a lot of families
are wanting to think about this indeed a
lot of teachers obviously
i wanted to think about this and i
wanted to give a really clear answer to
that the best i can
patrick may want to add to that well
it's a very complete answer and i
completely agree with it i think
it's crucial we get children back to
school
the environment as chris has said has
been made progressively
more safe for children to do that and
we're in a situation now where if we can
get the children back
we can measure after five weeks the
effect we've got
three weeks before a two-week holiday
this is the right thing to do
and it's right to get that as the top
priority
yeah and jason i don't think i'm being
remotely a a gloomster
in what i say listening to uh the uh
this this road map it's pretty obvious
you know the crocus of of hope is poking
through the
uh the frost and spring is on its way
both
both literally and metaphorically but i
won't be buccaneering
as you put it with uh with people's
lives and nor will anybody in
in in government i think when people
look at this uh road map
i think actually it's about as dynamic
as it's uh
uh possible to to be under the
circumstances and with uh disease and
infection
uh where we are if you'd said to me uh
you know a few months ago uh that by
june the 21st we were going to be in a
position where we thought it was uh
really credible
uh to open up everything including uh
nightclubs
uh i i would have struggled to to
believe you
uh quite frankly but that's the miracle
of the vaccination
program that has has has delivered
that and i think what this roadmap does
is it strikes a
balance it allows us uh to go forward
uh cautiously and not to go
back and i think that's what people
really want they want
uh to go forward as fast as reasonably
reasonably
and and safely can and not
to be forced uh backwards again i think
they would rather trade
uh some haste as i say for
for certainty and security about the
the deadlines that we're setting okay
thank you pippa of the mirror good
evening
um the roadmap promises a review into
whether
it's going to be possible to ease social
distancing rules from june the 22nd
professor witty and sir patrick you've
both previously suggested that some of
those may be in place
at the end of the year can give us any
idea
when we might be able to go back to the
office or more importantly for
for most people to hug or kiss our loved
ones
or can we really look forward to an end
social distancing this summer and prime
minister
you said earlier in the comments that
you will not pull the rug out from under
businesses and workers
and yet you've told them that they have
to wait until the budget many especially
the self-employed and hospitality sector
already on the brink
and now face are facing more months of
lockdown restrictions
meaning as the country opens up this
summer we could be facing
mass job losses can you give them the
reassurance that they so desperately
need
now
yes so as we get the
population vaccinated and the ambition
is to have all adults
have a first dose by the of july as the
prime minister has said
you start to get real protection across
the entire population
at that point many of these things that
we've got in place now will have gone
it's possible that coming into next
winter in particular
certain things may be necessary and tony
fauci yesterday said in the us that he
thought that things like
masks may be needed next winter and i
think we're in the same position that it
may be necessary next winter
to have things like mask wearing in
certain situations
hand hygiene should remain part of the
norm
making sure that if we get the sorts of
symptoms that we know are associated
with covid we stay off work
having an effective test trace and
isolate systems still in place
will be an important part of the
baseline measures that we're talking
about
and taking individual responsibility
for thinking about where there's an
environment in which there could be a
risk particularly during the winter
months
are the sorts of things that i think we
should expect for next winter
that's not the same as a whole raft of
npis in place
restricting movement now all of this
depends on what we see
and what we measure and how this goes
i'm not making any promises about
anything
but those are the sorts of measures that
you might expect i think as a sort of
baseline to be required
during winter months chris you may want
to
ah on
on the hospitality sector i know how
tough it is it's been
uh for that sector and particularly for
the many female workers in
in that sector who make up such a large
proportion of the of the
workforce and uh we will of course
continue to support uh them in
any way that we can throughout the the
pandemic and rishi will be
uh the chancellor will be setting out
more uh
next week um to go with this
road map we've already as you know uh
done uh
280 billion pounds worth of support for
the whole economy
on getting people back into work
particularly particularly young people
don't forget there's the kickstart
program uh worth two billion pounds
on its own to help people into
employment if they lose their jobs in in
hospitality or retail or any other
any other sector but the best thing for
all these sectors
is just to get them open again in a
covered secure
way on the on the dates that we've
uh set out we really really hope
and not to go backwards that's what
we're we're trying to do and i think
that sense of
of a date an ambition a goal uh will be
i hope i hope will be reassuring to a
great many
uh businesses as they take the difficult
decisions that they
they must thanks very much let's go to
to to joe murphy of the evening standard
thank you very much prime minister and
good evening um can i ask you all
one quick one each to finish off
sir patrick what's the science
underlying the new requirement for
secondary school pupils
to wear masks for a few weeks what's the
data that you want to see
that'll mean they can take them off
again professor
whittie you spoke about the fantastic
uptake of the vaccine
but is it or is it not the case that we
are seeing evidence that in some
nhs and care home settings people are
declining the vaccine in surprising
numbers
should could you ever see it being a
condition of employment
to have a vaccination in a care setting
or an nhs setting and prime minister can
i ask you about the future of our great
city centers
places like london manchester and
birmingham
with work from home extending to
mid-summer
is there a risk of them being hollowed
out in the center with office workers
choosing to stay at home for longer
meaning fewer shoppers fewer leisure
spenders
is there a division perhaps some people
say to you
well accept this as inevitable and
maybe turn some of those office blocks
into housing other people say
what we need is a marshall plan for the
city centres around the country
to recover them and save the businesses
that are staring disaster in the face
right now
um
in schools ventilation is going to be
important as children go back good
ventilation
mast will add to the protection and hand
washing and good
hand hygiene adds to the protection so
mask wearing during this period when
schools are back secondary schools are
talking about
here in terms of the mask wearing and
then we'll measure
effects of schools going back at the
five-week time period probably four
weeks we'll have the
effects and we'll be able to see whether
things have come back
under control in terms of schools being
back and
no expansion of the um epidemic
um in a way that would mean that that um
we can't can't go ahead with the next
set of steps and at that point i think
we can see what the consequences of the
various
actions are on whether mask wearing
continues and for how long it needs to
continue as it is in the adult
population and it's really only for
those children
who are able to do so in secondary
school
on nhs and care home workers i mean i
think what people want to understand is
uh is the disease a serious disease i
think everyone who works in care homes
or nursing or in
the nhs fully understands that secondly
does the vaccine work and i think today
we've seen yet further
really clear evidence this vaccine
protects against mild disease
it protects against asymptomatic disease
which means you can protect people
around you and it protects against
severe disease so it really works
and the data on safety is reassuring and
continues to mount
people want to know about that and i
think those bits of information are
getting stronger and stronger the whole
time
actually in most health and social care
settings that i'm i've seen
and the data would back this up people
are really keen to get the vaccine
there are obviously some people who've
got some caution and we need to have
that discussion with them
uh but i think uh going uh you know my
view
is clearly for medical staff where i am
subject to the same code in my it is a
professional responsibility
for doctors to do things which help
protect their patients
and i expect that to be a professional
responsibility for all other health and
social care staff as well
now questions around contracting are not
really for me
the only comment i'd make on that is
there has been you know it has been a
norm for example
there's an expectation if you're a
surgeon you've got a hepatitis b vaccine
so it's not that this was completely new
territory but i think that's not really
a question for me that's a political
question
the the uh the professional expectation
very strongly my view is
professional uh medical and social care
staff should be taking it
yeah and and joe since uh chris has said
it's a political question
but i bet i want to dodge that uh
implication and just say
uh that um i think that in in the case
of
of care homes i know that some of the uh
of the
very high quality care home groups are
now looking at
uh what they can do to make sure that
their staff are indeed
uh vaccinated but on your on your
question about
um uh the city centers and
what's going to happen uh it's very very
important question and
i think that there will be changes as a
result of the
of the pandemic and i think that it will
accelerate some
trends and it may be that as you rightly
say joe there's opportunities for
uh more residential accommodation in uh
in uh in town centers in in high streets
uh that uh which have been you know
changing the way they
they work anyway for for a long time but
you know i'm a i'm a sca
i don't believe uh that this is gonna
mean a fundamental change to the way
our life in our big cities really works
and i used to chair
tfl for a long time transport for london
and i
remember the better remote communication
gets and the more people can
see each other and talk on on on mobile
devices and the rest of it
as a paradox the more actually they want
to see each other
face to face uh for whatever reason
and and that i'm sure will come back and
i think that london our great cities
uh will be filled uh full of buzz and
life
uh and excitement again uh provided
people have confidence about coming back
into those
city centers it's going to be and then
you'll get all the agglomeration effects
that make london such an amazing place
and make our
our cities so so amazing but it's all
going to be about confidence and that
confidence is going to come from the
continuing success of the
the vaccination program and people sense
that the disease
is finally being managed in a way that
they understand
that it's being controlled and as as
chris and patrick
have said that it's it's it's can't
become something like
flu that we have to manage and and to
organize and
uh and to live with uh and that's it and
then i think uh you'll see
life really uh coming back to normal
again so i'm
i'm i'm a skeptic uh about when when
people say that this is going to lead to
a
massive change in urban uh life uh i
i i'm doubtful i think that our great
cities
will bounce back along with the rest of
the economy uh once we've got this
this roadmap delivered anyway that's all
we've got time for
tonight everybody thank you very much
thank you
boris johnson
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app
and get the full story with bbc dot co
dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news